Welcome back remember how we said the javascript is a single threaded language but with the asynchronous
ability we're able to do things in the background so that even though we have javascript that is just
one thread we're able to do these complex things and still have Web sites and programs that perform
well because with the asynchronous model these requests that take a long time don't block the main thread
but the thing is where do they go where does the Web API have this compute power to run these things.
And the thing is tasks in a web browser for example or even a node where we use something like fetch
or set timeout or look into the database or read a file system in node these are still executed in threats.
The thing is this is hidden from us because often they are running on their own separate background
threats outside of JavaScript you see when I create a new tab here the browser creates one thread per
tab so that I have an entire javascript call stack and memory heap in here every time on new taps.
And as soon as I close the tab while that thread dies and is gone now on the main thread let's say on
this Web site the javascript program that I'm running is on the main thread but sometimes there's things
that we need to do in the background and the browser has something called Web workers that work in the
background for me that I don't really need to know about.
But if there's something complicated that needs to happen that's outside of my control.
They take care of it for me by the way.
Remember this diagram where I talked about the idea of a single threaded model and no GSM became popular
because even though it had this one thread it was able to pass off things into the callback queue so
that it never blocked this one single thread and it just passed things on two different things.
Unlike the traditional model where any requests that we would have towards a server we would spawn a
new thread handle that.
But because that will be blocked we would have to spawn another thread for the next request and if we
ran out of threads while the requests would have to wait for our threat pool to be available and no
GSM is able to do this because of something called WORKER THREADS you see in the background.
Although the limitation of the V V8 JavaScript engine is this single threaded model with one call stack
we can pass things off to something like lib you V that is written in C++ to handle work or threads
and multiple worker threads in the background for us.
And just like that on the browser we also have this idea of a web worker and a web worker is a javascript
program running on a different thread in parallel to our main thread.
Now how can we create something like that it's quite easy.
We can just simply say variable Walker equals new worker
and this worker hour window object will have access to and it can read from a javascript file.
Let's say worker dot J.S. file will make sure I spell that right.
So we can spawn a new Web worker and assign it to worker and now in here from this worker we can actually
do something called post message to post a message to another thread so I can say hello and in a different
thread such as let's say the main thread I can just say ad event listener.
And then just listen to a message.
And if we get a message like post message well we can take that data from one worker into our own thread
now most of the time you won't be working with Web workers.
I just want to show you that they do exist in the background.
The main takeaway is that web worker is a javascript program running on a different thread alongside
our main threat just like a browser creates a new threat for us when I create new taps on our program.
Now keep in mind that these Web workers communicate through these messages that I just showed you but
they don't really have access to all the browser web API is like they don't have access to Windows or
document object but they do have some abilities like using set timeout location or navigator.
But luckily for us on the browser that's taking care of it for us right.
Using things like fetch on the browser we don't need to worry about different threads working on something
else.
We just call it using this facade function and it's a facade because underneath the hood it calls on
to the web API and says Hey web API I have something for you.
Can you take care of it for us.
Which is really nice it's out of our hands.
What about in note what happens in note.
Well as you saw we have worker threads when we do something like reading from the file system in the
background node does these things for you reading from a database note does it for you.
So we don't really need to worry about having to create our own threads which is really really nice.
It makes our programs simple.
Now I want to finish off this video with this diagram that I actually got from Stack Overflow and I
think is absolutely great.
This shows the difference between two terms that are really really common but also confusing the idea
of concurrency and parallelism.
You see if we ran this first program where we only have a single core CPI you on our computer what the
computer would be doing is it'll be working on one thread as soon as it's done with that thread or has
a bit of time a bit of pause it can switch to the next thread and work on something there and then go
back to thread one because we have more work to do.
And then back to thread 2 it can switch back and forth between these two threads but only allowing one
thread to run out of time because we have a single core CPI that is once a B you can do work.
So the best way to think about it is just like this man over here eating in a single threaded model.
You just have one mouth to eat these things.
One mouth means ACP you but you have two hands right.
So you can grab something from the plate.
Let's say an apple and bring that to your mouth and once you're done with that you can grab a another
hand with let's say a banana and grab that and bring it towards your mouth and that is what concurrency
is concurrency is something that we can achieve in JavaScript right we're using concurrency when we
work on our single threaded javascript but in the background we use note or Web browsers to actually
allow us to do things in the background on different threads so that we can accomplish things but we
can only do those once our main stack main call stack is done with our work and then we have this idea
of concurrency as well as parallelism and that can only happen when we have things like multicore CPE
use that is many CB use many more mouth than just one.
And this is kind of like that men having too much or having two people eat food with two hands each
if we ran this program the multicore CPI you would allow us to execute threads at the same time because
each one would be on a different CPI you so we'd be able to run these threads in parallel side by side
at the exact same time.
How cool is that now when it comes to parallelism and JavaScript.
You can't really do that can you.
It's not really built into the language but there is a way to achieve something like this.
Let's say something like node you see node was built for simplicity but if you have let's say for CPE
use on your computer or server then you can run that node instance on all those for CB use so how do
we create more of these processes that can run on multiple course.
Well in node we can do something like spawn and there's three other ways of doing this.
Different ways of doing this but we'll just use spawn as a good example and we'll just require the child
process module that comes with node which will spawn a new process and then we can just run this process
by saying let's just say get
stuff.
And if I run this all generate a new process that I can run.
Now this is very advanced.
You can read up on your own.
The point of this video is just to show you the idea of concurrency and parallelism.
The idea of threads and how that works in our programming and although javascript might be single thread
it might have just one call stack.
The beauty is in its restriction and simplicity because this is really really hard to manage parallelism
is extremely difficult especially when you have these two threads touching the same data the fact that
we have a single call stack in our program allows us to write really nice clean code and have asynchronous
events that happen which I think makes things really really fun to code and avoid some really really
strange bugs that might occur in a model like this.
All right.
This was a little bit beyond the scope of the course.
I just wanted to throw it out there so you can go explore on your own if you're interested.
As always thanks for watching.
I'll see you in the next one.
Bye bye.